Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Warren Norwood, a newly emerged science
fiction writer who is a finalist in the balloting for the 1983 John W. Campbell
Award, the award given annually to the best new writer. Norwood hit the scene
with his first novel in a series dubbed The Windhover Tapes. Volume 1 is An
Image of Voices, Volume 2 Flexing the Warp, and Volume 3 Fize of the Gabriel
Ratchets. The protagonist is Gerard Manley, a spacefaring diplomat who journeys
in a sentient craft called the Windhover. We asked Norwood if by any coincidence
the series had anything to do with Gerard Manley Hopkins, the 19th century
English poet. Yeah, it's my left-handed salute to the old man. I mean, I think
he was a poet who was probably 100 years ahead of his time.
He's not one of those poets that you walk around reciting verses to at people's
parties, but I think he did marvelous. I think he took marvelous chances with
the language and marvelous chances with poetry, and some of it is just, you
know, it's breathtaking. But no one's going to read a tribute to Gerard Manley
Hopkins. So when I sat down to do the story, I had already decided that I was
going to name the ship Windhover, which is his most famous poem, The Windhover.
And it just seemed, you know, the natural thing to do, to name the character
Gerard Manley, and especially since he is interested in poetry, right? And then
in the second book, when Gerard finds himself at the end of his road and thinks
this is going to be it, it's going to be all over, he writes a poem to GM, which
is himself, right? But it's also the poem to Gerard Manley Hopkins. And it
echoes the language of The Windhover, Hopkins' The Windhover. It echoes that
language and asks some of the same questions only from Gerard's point of view
rather than from Hopkins' point of view. So yeah, it's all very intentional. I
mean, with 54-hour minor in English, it's hard to be unintentional about things
like that. So the series is filled with all sorts of allusions to Hopkins that
should please any English major. We were curious about the type of audience at
which Norwood was aiming. After all, not all readers are English majors. I think
it was Raymond Chandler, but I'm not sure who said that I write first to
entertain myself and hope that others are entertained. I had a certain audience
awareness in that when I went back and did the second draft, I simplified the
language somewhat from the original draft because I thought I had gotten too
carried away. But I didn't write it thinking of a specific audience. For those
books, I really didn't have an audience in mind. It was just a story that I had
been thinking about for eight or nine months, and I wanted to tell. And that
seemed more important. And then when I made the decision about how to tell the
story, I knew, without deliberating on it a great deal, that I had limited my
audience. But I thought, well, I'm willing to take the chance because I figured
I needed something to break into the market, and I think you have to take
chances to do that.
Manley is a galactic diplomat in An Image of Voices, although he abandons this
role in the subsequent novels. Say galactic diplomat to a science fiction fan,
and he'll respond, Retief, meaning Keith Laumer's famous protagonist. We asked
Norwood if Retief influenced the character of Gerard Manley. I tried to make
Gerard not like Retief, right, while still maintaining that intergalactic
diplomat role. I tried to make him a very different kind of diplomat. But there
were times, in fact, in the first draft, there are sections where it got a
little Retief-like, kind of unconsciously, and then I had to go back and say,
gee, I think I read this somewhere before, and I didn't write it. And then you
have to go back and clean things up. More with Warren Norwood on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. The cover on each novel in Warren Norwood's
Science Fiction series, The Windhover Tapes, features a complimentary blurb
written by Anne McCaffrey, the author of the famous dragon books. McCaffrey
wrote in a blurb on the back of the first novel, An Image of Voices, that she
had known of Norwood's ambitions for four years. We asked Norwood about his
relationship with Anne McCaffrey. I was a book salesman for Ballantine.
Ballantine Del Rey did the McCaffrey dragon books, among others. And when she
did the first promotion tour around the country for the hardcover edition of
White Dragon, I cornered the Del Rey direct salesman and said, If you don't get
her into some of my wholesale accounts, you know, I'm going to break your knees.
Besides, I want to meet her. I mean, there's other reasons besides. So I got her
into, I think, three of the accounts, and then we took her to the airport
together, and her plane was an hour and a half late. So we sat in the bar in the
airport drinking Coors beer, which is one of her favorites, and she can't get in
Ireland, and listening to Annie tell stories, which is a marvelous experience in
and of itself. When she came back the following year for the paperback tour for
White Dragon, my wife and I picked her up at the airport, took her to the hotel
in Dallas, which was on fire at the time, so that was all very exciting. She was
extremely tired. It was the 23rd day of a 28-day tour in 31 cities or something
like that, and she was beginning. So we ended up staying until like 1 or 2 o
'clock in the morning because she couldn't sleep and just talking and chatting,
and then I took her around all the next day with a case of Coors beer iced down
in the back and about three melons all diced up because you can't get fresh
melon in Ireland either, right? So she munched on melon and drank Coors beer all
day while we toured Dallas and Fort Worth and visited bookstores and radio
stations and developed a grand rapport and ended up at the airport drinking
Coors beer and having a wonderful time. So we corresponded then fairly
regularly. I say fairly regularly three or four times a year after that, and
after I'd finished the book and Bantam had bought it, they said, you know, who
do you know? And I said, well, the author I know best is Anne McCaffrey, and so
I asked her, I said, you know, would you read it? And she said yes, and then she
said those wonderful things, and I don't remember anything for about a week
after getting that letter, you know. Annie's letter was as much of a high as the
sale, right, because it was some kind of confirmation that I had in fact done it
right. Yeah. It was as much of a high as the sale was itself.
Norwood originally envisioned the Windhover Tapes as a trilogy, and he wrote it
as such. But then it was announced later that the series would be four books
long, a tetralogy. We asked Norwood why the change. Anne McCaffrey. It's Anne
McCaffrey's fault. I don't blame it on Annie. She wrote after she, she has read
all the books in manuscript now. When after she finished the third book, she
wrote me this long, long letter asking me this whole list of questions. She
said, you have answered all the main questions in the story. I'm not objecting
to that, but I want to know this, and I want to know that, and I want to know
this, and I want to know that, and are you ever going to talk about this, and
are you ever going to talk about that? And she said, either write me a long
letter back or write another book. So I laughingly shared that letter with my
editor and started thinking about the answers to those questions, but it hadn't
gotten beyond that point until the first book started to sell really well. And
then my editor said, gee, you ought to think about the fourth book. And I said,
well, the only way I'll do a fourth book if it's the final book, because I don't
want an endless series. If I can make this the final book, and under these
conditions, then I will write it, and I will answer Annie's question. So the
fourth book is going to be to answer Annie's questions. I mean, that's what
started the whole thing. It's Anne McCaffrey's fault. Bless her heart. We'll
have more with Warren Norwood on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. A number of people write poetry. They do so
for various reasons, among them for escape, as a creative outlet, or for self
-expression. Quite a few science fiction writers compose poetry as well. Gene
Wolfe, Ray Bradbury, and Michael Bishop, for instance. But it's virtually
impossible to make a living solely by writing and selling poetry. A few
magazines and anthologies purchase poems, but the pay is a pittance. The poets
among us must write it for love, not money. But one science fiction writer,
Warren Norwood, has chosen a different tack. As we discussed previously, his
Windhover series owes a lot to the poet Gerard Manley Hopkins. Norwood, a poet
as well as a writer, inserts his own poems in his novels. Fury comments on this
practice. Oh, yes, yes. One of the modus operandi in the very beginning was to
bootleg the poetry into the story. In fact, it was the Tenderfoot cycle of poems
which helped me formulate how I wanted to put the story together. And all the
Tenderfoot poems aren't in there, fortunately.
But that was part of what I wanted to do in the books because I thought, again,
that was something else that was... I was taking enough chances. I thought, I'll
take one more. I'll go ahead and try this and see what happens.
I've been writing poetry since I was nine, so I obviously believe in it in some
form or another. So I thought, why not do that and see if we can make it work?
And I was very fortunate and found an editor who believed in it after having
talked to several others who did not believe in it at all. We wondered if
writing poetry helped Norwood write fiction. I think so because if you write
poetry regularly and try constantly to improve it, then you're constantly
working with the language. You're constantly trying to squeeze from the language
as much meaning as possible. So it makes you extremely cognizant of words and
their meanings and their subtleties and shades of meanings. I think that writing
poetry can also hurt your prose. I think that you can, in fact, get too poetic.
You're trying to put too much in. You're trying to make your prose too poetic. I
think it's... I marvel at some of the stuff that Gene Wolfe writes. I mean, I
think some of his prose just blows me away. But at the same time, I think that
sometimes he sticks with a level of writing that is almost too poetic for the
part of the story he's trying to tell, that instead of doing it in rhythms, he's
so caught up in that rhythm, so caught up in that level, that poetic level, that
he can't bring it down to a faster, cleaner action scene where you get out of
that and you sweep the reader along and then pull them back up to another poetic
height. And so I think, you know, this is not to criticize Gene Wolfe, but it's
to say that I think that because he is a poet and because he is so poetically
involved with the language that it has detracted a little bit from what he might
have otherwise done with the story. Of course, all this is envy on my part
because if I could write prose like Gene Wolfe writes, I would be a very happy
man. Gerard Manley, Norwood's protagonist in the Windhover tape series, analyzes
poetry for many worlds in his spare time with the help of his sentient ship,
Windhover. We asked Norwood if there are present-day computers capable of
analyzing poetry in the same fashion. Very crude ones at this stage of the game,
but there's been work that's been done on that. Several universities have done
experimental programming with programming computers to write poetry, programming
computers to translate poetry, and it's all at a very crude level so my
extrapolation of that is a big stretch, but I thought given the progress of
technology that in 7,000 years it seemed reasonable that we'd figure out how to
do it. We'll have more with Warren Norwood on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And to Bill Vernon. Warren Norwood's series, The Windhover
Tapes, is an imaginative blend of hard science and characterization. The
protagonist is Gerard Manley, a space-faring diplomat and scholar. Much of the
first two volumes is written in a unique style, internal dialogue between Manley
and his self. Manley recalls dreams in the early volumes. These allow him to
reconstruct his past, a past detailed in the third volume, Fize of the Gabriel
Ratchets. We asked Norwood if he dreams as Manley does. I dreamed a great deal
from the time I, well, from somewhere in the middle of Vietnam until about six,
seven years afterward. And I think that's the major influence on Gerard's
dreams. And they were very vivid and they were very recallable in the same way
that he recalls them, where I could, they would start as fragments when I woke
up and then I could pull them back. I could bring more pieces back into the
dream. That kind of faded off after about six, seven years after I got back from
Vietnam and I don't do nearly as much of it. But that's where it came from, that
process came from. And then in Gerard's case, it's part of what he suspects and
it's, he's getting a mirror image of what was a prescient talent and his
prescience in effect kind of turned around and giving him a way to look back
into his past, warped by the mind wipers.
Norwood does not write science fiction in the lecture mode. Rather, he allows
the context of the story to explain itself. He relies on other devices as well.
I did what a great number of science fiction writers do and that is I built on
what had gone before and there's such a huge basis now of groundwork that has
been done for us that we don't have to spend a lot of time explaining how this
works and how that works and, you know, oh, actually, this warp takes us through
tachyon space, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, right? We
can just use key words and key concepts and the reader has already been grounded
in that and then you can spend more time telling the story instead of having
more time explaining all the mechanical functions. There's a hard science,
there's a big hard science story that I really want to write but I don't think I
have the skills yet as a writer to do it so I'm saving that one for when I'm
better trained in my craft. We mentioned that Norwood's series is a character
study as well. A good example is Norwood's treatment of Manley's relationship
with his wife, ShRil. Manley meets ShRil early in the first volum, An Image of
Voices. She is a researcher on the planet Moseen, there to research universal
legends among civilized worlds. Manley shares this interest too. Manley and ShRil
slowly fall in love. In the second volume, Flexing the Warp, they marry in an
elaborate ceremony. A good bit of Flexing the Warp deals with ShRil's
pregnancy. This is certainly a novelty in a science fiction work. The details
are so vivid and realistic that we had to ask Norwood if he had gone through a
pregnancy himself. Through the pregnancy and through a miscarriage before it, so
that I took all that and you write what you know and so I put that in there
because those were very important times of my life when they happened. I was
there when my daughter was born in the delivery room and that's why we got to
have the big group scene when CrRina is born and I thought, everybody ought to
get to share this experience because it was really a lot of fun. And one of
those, again, one of those gratifying things is to have a fan come up and say,
gee, I really like, female fans especially, you really got that down, I really
understand that. Or husbands come up and say, my wife was like that when she was
pregnant. I mean, Gerard makes a wonderful comment in there that maybe women
change species when they're pregnant. There's some biological basis for that. On
our next show, more with Warren Norwood.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Ever wonder how an author goes about writing
a book, how the storyline develops, where characters come from? We had occasion
to ask these questions of science fiction writer Warren Norwood. Character with
a problem. That's how most of my stories begin, is character with a problem. I
write short stories that are unsaleable because the characters have problems
that are either so bizarre or so obscene. Or something else that, even though
the problem gets resolved by the end of the story that no one's really
interested, that's fine because I just write them for fun. They're characters
who pop into my head with this particular problem and I let them run through
that section of their lives until they solve the problem. And then they go back
in the drawer and I've gotten them out of my head, which is the most important
thing. But I start with a character with a problem and very shortly thereafter,
I say shortly, usually in terms of two to three weeks for a novel length work, I
have a very good idea of how the story ends. So I have a beginning and an ending
and the middle is just, it's like standing, I remember as a kid standing the
first time we went through Tennessee and standing on one of those overlooks and
looking out across to the mountains on the other side and there was nothing but
fog and mist in the bottom. Well, that's kind of how I feel when I get ready to
start a novel. I know where I am and I know where the mountain is on the other
side, but what's in the middle there, I don't know, except you have to go down
and you have to come back up in order to get there. And then that middle
resolves itself in a very vague way as I begin the story. Norwood then told us
that after the story is set, the characters often develop lives of their own.
And I found the more that I try to put my characters through paces in the middle
to do certain things, the less cooperative they become. So what I try to do then
is tap them back in the line when they start pushing the plot too far away. I
think I'll never get to the end this way if you guys keep going left, edge a
little right and make me happy. So I nudge them back to the right a little bit
and then they head back there and then they go way off too far to the right and
then you have to nudge them back to the left. It's a strange process. Especially
when they come alive in the back of your head and they start saying things and
doing things that you didn't expect them to do. An example of this process can
be seen in ShRil, the lead female character in Norwood's Windhover tape
series. ShRil's pregnancy is a perfect example of that. I mean, she wasn't
supposed to get pregnant for another six months in this story because I had to
get them where they were going first, right? I was going to have her get
pregnant someplace safe. Oh, no, she had to get pregnant. And then she and
Gerard had to argue about it and then I was angry at both of them and then I had
to back off and take five pages out of the manuscript and say, wait a minute.
Take them back to the beginning of that scene and say, it's your problem. You
work it out. I'll write it down. You just tell me what to write down. And so I
let them argue about the problem and solve their difficulties and it was all
fine. And I learned a valuable lesson. Keep your cotton-picking hands off their
lives when they're doing it themselves. Norwood recently published a novel with
Ralph Mylius called The Seren Cenacles. The independence their characters
achieved caused interesting problems for the co-authors. When Ralph and I did
our book, one of the things that happened was we started with a male protagonist
and then a minor protagonist who was female. And she came alive for me about the
same time that he came alive for Ralph. And so Ralph was writing the first draft
and he was putting words in her mouth and then when I was reading it and getting
ready to write the second draft, she was in the back of my head screaming, no,
no, no, I wouldn't say that. I wouldn't react like that. So I'd get on the phone
to Ralph and I'd say, Kalissae says that she wouldn't react like this. And he
said, well, we'll work it out tomorrow at our story conference. And we'd sit
there for eight hours trying to hash out dialogue between a character who was
alive in his head and a character who was alive in my head. And he had to have
enough sense of that to go back then and write first draft material based on
what I had told him about a character who was living in my head. The only thing
that saved us was that some character didn't come alive that way for both of us,
right, who then would have been schizophrenic. He'd have been alive one way in
Ralph's head and another way in my head and we'd probably had to, you know, do
something. We'd have to divide him into two characters.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.